Introductory courses at my undergraduate university were extremely difficult and cutthroat.  Students referred to these as ‘weeder classes’ and they were almost always graded on a curve.  The idea behind this was that departments did not want students declaring a major that was too difficult for them to pursue or a major they were not fully committed to.  In classes such as Calculous I/II and Economics 101 the tests were designed to be incredibly challenging with tricky questions and an inadequate time limit.  I was shocked by the fast-paced, competitive, and highly stressful environment I stepped into.

The most difficult weeder class I took was called EECS 183 (Electrical Engineering Computer Science 183).  This was an introductory course for computer programming and focused on the fundamentals of C++.  Students were mostly graded on exams and projects.  The exams consisted of multiple-choice questions that were intentionally designed to trip you up and hand-written code.  I performed horribly on all these exams which caused me a great deal of stress and depression.  This was incredibly disappointing because I truly felt I was a decent coder.  I understood the material and would often help others in the class.  All the projects were challenging but I completed them very successfully.  One of my partners (who is now a software engineer at Apple) once said I was a far better at picking up coding skills than he was.

Kohn points out that “Grades create a preference for the easiest possible task”.  I believe this is very true in my case.  I chose not to pursue a degree associated with computer programming as the difficulty of EECS 183 (and future programming classes) left me disheartened.  I ultimately decided to major in Economics as I believed that attaining better grades in this field would lead to more success in the working world.  This was unfortunate as a more technical, computer-based path would have been a much better fit for me.

Another issue that Kohn brings up is that “grades … promote a fear of failure even in high-achieving students”.  I believe this comment very much applied to my undergraduate years.  I found myself consumed with fear of failing (or not achieving the grades I desired) and put all my effort into attaining a specific mark rather than truly learning course material.  It was rare for me to leave the library before midnight, and I would often skip social events to study for class.  Months after taking classes, I would not remember much of the course material, but taking stressful exams and fearing for my grade would always be burned into my memory.  I believe that this fear of failure led to an extreme hatred of school and education.  After I finished undergrad, I vowed never to take another college class.

With this said, I am conflicted with the idea of eliminating grades entirely.  Although I believe that grades have been detrimental to my mental health, they have also served as an incredibly large spur.  Kohn seems to be a proponent of “intrinsic motivation, a desire to learn for its own sake”.  I do not believe that I could have achieved all I did in my undergrad years depending on intrinsic motivation alone.  I am the type of person who requires an extra prod to perform at my fullest potential.  I feel that a much less competitive or intense grading system would work give me to extra push I need in the academic world.  Outside the academic world I am motivated by finances, the longing to solve problems, and a desire to help others on my team.  Perhaps these could also be incorporated in the academic world to provide motivation for students.
